# Lab Report: Programming Literature

#### Dipshika Chawla

## Process Description

For the Programming Literature lab, we explored Twitterbots and created our own. I familiarized myself with Tracery, the rules of writing in JSON, the various templates available on the Tracery text editor (landscape, poem, etc), and other resources.We explored other resources, tutorials, and examples as well. The examples were very interesting as these Tweetbots were live on Twitter, fairly sophisticated, and quite hilarious. The process started with categorising the words in my poem to logically create symbols. I dedicated majority of the session to categorization of words, assigning values to symbols in JSON within the Tracery text editor, and drafting an origin. Engaging with my peers and professor helped me address my roadblocks and learn from our varying bots and bot issues! I created a functioning Twitterbot by the end of the class, however I was unsatisfied with the origin and outcomes of the bot - a popular opinion given the nature of bots _remediating dynamics of cut-up and experiential art_ and not making perfect sense due to their constraint of predetermined rules. I also accounted the inferiority of my bot to the small dictionary inputted. As a takeaway from class, I decided to expand my bot’s dictionary and improve the origin it followed.

---

## Observations

I had a good understanding of what Twitterbots were, partly because of the intuitive name, and because of encounters with such automation on the daily. I primarily envisioned Twitterbots as spam or something Computer Science “bros” did for fun, but this lab really developed my perspective towards Twitterbots as a genre of Electronic Literature and as a means of uncanny propaganda. I loved @TwoHeadlines as it simply reminded me of how real news headlines trigger a certain emotion in me, and how @TwoHeadlines takes a comedic and trivial spin on this emotion. I found myself reading the headlines eagerly (and with mild concern) every time, only to find out it is a Robo-joke - it’s oddly de-stressing to see a joke in the midst of horrifying news headlines in the real world! In oversimplified terms, bots are uncreative and function solely on the variety of rules and combination of values inputted. Despite these known facts, we are amused by bots for their ability of _drawing out something new and unexpected_ from _pre-existing textual artifacts_. 

Given the wide range of possibilities with Twitterbots, many creators shadow their value systems in their bots. An example is a bot built to fight racism or alert people for natural disasters. These are bots created with good intents, they are appreciated and their positive impact is echoed across Twitter. Similarly, bots often create a negative unforeseen impact given their algorithmic nature and absent human judgment. This raises the question in my mind, to what extent can a creator optimise his bot? And how do we treat the creator and his bot, as two separate entities or one as a subset of the other? This type of social automation on various platforms is revolutionary, entertaining, and often with a deep-rooted purpose, however, how we weigh its affordances and limitations is **non-binary**. 

---

## Analysis

The adaptability of bots, as I have surfaced earlier, was reiterated by Leonardo Flores as “Every data stream (linguistic or not and with or without an API) can be harnessed, shaped, and incorporated into a bot’s algorithm.” I think the process of categorising linguistic streams (sentences, poetry snippets, etc) and enabling it to be treated as individual “data values” is a creative process of its own. It is not the same creativity as that of an author or journalist, but it is the ability to codify language (to some extent) that otherwise requires significant cognitive ability and human effort. In addition to adaptability, Twitter bots are extremely accessible, so much so that according to Buzzfeed, as of 2014 Twitter had 26 million active bot users. 

Bots are capable of carrying out multiple intertwined instructions and achieve objectives ranging from remixing, retweeting certain content, keyword replying, and more. Despite expecting such flexibility, I was very intrigued by the endless possibilities of coding in this linguistic/literary context - something I had never thought of before. The complexity of the bot is up to the creator, and I resonate with the idea that this unconventional application of code to creative horizons such as poetry and literature, with big datasets and predetermined rules, provides a way of _seeing literary objects anew and engaging creatively_ - it paves the path for discovering never-seen-before content. So much so, these recurrent patterns and thematic tweets from the bots result in us humanising them and characterising them as the “angry” bot, the “protest” bot, or the bot of “conviction”. It is almost like the bots have personalities of their own and creators build these robots bottom-up to exhibit certain emotions or serve specific functions, for example @NRA_Tally. Given the technological feasibility and affordances of Twitterbots, they are also an appropriate approach to conduct unique research as performed by Kevin Munger in 2016. 

As part of Élika Ortega’s Twitterbot workshop, she compares Twitterbots to graffiti. I think this was an extremely appropriate parallel to draw as one’s opinion on the ethicality, beauty, and purpose of Twitterbots or Graffiti are highly subjective. They are both _interventions in a public space_, whether real or virtual. This ties back to my point of the affordances and limitations of Twitterbots as non-binary. To extend this comparison, like Graffitis are integrated (and regulated) in our physical lives, similarly, robot accounts are integrated (and regulated) in our virtual social spaces. Despite Twitter’s statistics around robot accounts and measures taken by many companies to prevent robot accounts, as stated in “How to Think About Bots” on vice.com, “Wholesale elimination of bots on social media would, after all, also get rid of bots doing important work in journalism and silence the variety of bots appreciated for their comedy and botness.”

---

