# Lab Report: Markdown and GitHub

#### Dipshika Chawla

---

## Process DescriptionFor my first lab activity in the Technologies of Text course, I learned about GitHub and Markdown. GitHub is a software development platform but can be used for any purpose given its affordances. Markdown is a ‘lightweight markup language’. To dissect this, markdown is the use of tags to define the format of text. The author can control the representation of the text – display, structure, and word formatting –through typographical symbols. The Markdown syntax lives in the text file, and this file can be rendered on multiple platforms. The output applies any Markdown tags, and final representation of the file is **text in its intended formatting and display structure**.In class, I primarily experimented with placeholder text, uploading images to the GitHub repository, different Markdown syntax, and saw a preview of the final representation on Hashify.com. All through the process, I continued to better my understanding of GitHub and witness the way in which a plain text .md file on my GitHub desktop is rendered into a finished piece of work when uploaded to the live GitHub repository (our .md file’s output platform, in this case). [A snapshot of my first experience with Markdown] (/images/Screen Shot 2019-09-18 at 2.10.41 pm 1.png)

---## ObservationsFirstly, I was (delightfully) surprised to realize I have been using four Markdown tags on the Facebook-owned messaging application, Whatsapp, since 2016. This helped confirm Markdown’s transdisciplinary nature and simplicity, as it is engrained in the average user’s digital messaging practices. From an academic and publishing standpoint, I think tools such as Markdown and GitHub are groundbreaking. I personally have a background in and am pursuing management information systems. I view GitHub as a strong contemporary platform with its version control, collaborative structure, and Markdown capabilities. During the lab, I was particularly drawn to the mobility and durability of .md files. The ‘flat’ file structure and elevated mobility across platforms makes it a superior file structure in several aspects. I specify academic and publishing as I instantly connect with the benefits of Markdown in writing research papers, books, and similar projects.The practicality of writing in markdown is evident beyond its technical affordances. I resonated with ‘not interrupting your writing to format your document.’ I think that is an empowering benefit for a writer and would be reflected in the form of improved focus, fewer writer’s blocks, and so forth. Despite its ease of use, I wonder how many writers have successfully adopted this technology and prefer it to traditional word processors. After weighing the affordances and limitations, I would be interested in specific use cases and individualistic influencing factors that determine preference.---## AnalysisThere have been, and continue to be, technological advancements in the realm of word processing. Majority of computer owners have access to fairly sophisticated full-feature word processors. This technological reality of today starkly contrasts that of 370 BCE, as seen in the excerpt from Plato’s _Phaedrus_. With my access to modern technology as well as to stories from the far past, it is strange to think of the journey from the discovery of letters, to establishment of written text, to today’s complex controls around text, its processing, and ownership. Writing, a concept that was alien and debated at the time of King Thamus, is so foundational today, that Markdown is merely syntax to style ‘writing’. I found myself seeking solutions to problems surfaced in the _Phaedrus_ excerpt such as “words can neither speak for themselves nor teach the truth adequately to others.” I drew a parallel between Socrates’ concern and ways in which modern textual technology such as Markdown, in its own contribution to visual controls, aims to convey the truth adequately to others through precise and cross-platform representation. Words don’t speak for themselves or take on lives of their own, but the advances in written information and its format have contributed to optimize the transfer of ‘truth’ as projected by the author, to the reader.I noticed a thought in Leah Price’s book similar to mine stated above,> The mere fact of being able to read came to be taken for granted, and new technologies and changing laws multiplied the number of books owned by the average household.  Leah Price. What We Talk About When We Talk About Books.Price also sets the ground for the argument ‘all new media is refashioning of old media’ as she says, > One constant in the history of books is their power to take new forms, and to prompt new ways of reading as a result.  Leah Price. What We Talk About When We Talk About Books.While text has lived on clay, papyrus, parchment, paper, digital screens, and more, reading the content, the information remains at the core across mediums. As books continue to take new forms, so do reading and writing. Writing is a global phenomenon in all languages, in the form of code, in Markdown, and so forth. As our textual habits have evolved, so have our reading and writing norms. Computational languages such as Markdown have dramatically changed the way we handle text – from the point of creation, processing, storage (often on cloud-based collaborative spaces such as GitHub), until distribution._Always Already New_ by Lisa Gitelman provides a simple explanation of media as a **representation of information**. The broad applicability of this statement instantly draws my attention to the concept of Markdown language – to style text and represent information as necessary or desired. Gitelman also connects the success of media to the “blindness of media technologies in favour of attention to the phenomena, the context that they represent for users’ edification or enjoyment.” While this stands true for conventionally understood forms of media such as TV or entertainment, I am able link this idea to the blindness of Markdown tags to the consumer of the document. Lastly, Gitelman claims, “the introduction of new media is never entirely revolutionary.” While Markdown is a new and evolved language, it definitely has a long and varied line of predecessors that have made styling of text possible with their own affordances and limitations –such as underscores (as an underline workaround) in typewriters, or handwritten styling via colour, symbols, etc. As mentioned in Leah Price’s book “In Shakespeare’s time, readers were not just permitted but expected to annotate. Schoolmasters taught boys elaborate notational systems for use in the margins.” Though this notational system is not exactly like Markdown text, it is a way of structuring and styling text to highlight certain parts or draw attention to the specific notational message present, as seen in Markdown text via bold or italicizing of content.